we call out for meaning from a universe
that's indifferent to us this version of
the Absurd threatens to Rob us of our
sanity here be lions and Dragons here be
cold and dark and emptiness and that's
uncomfortable if we're going to tell
ourself the truth that search for
meaning in a world that doesn't
obviously present us meaning is the
world that we need to embrace if we're
going to live honestly and authentically
well I can tell you what made itself
manifest as evidence for
[Music]
me hello everybody I'm talking today to
Dr Jack Sims he's a public philosopher
and researcher at Durham University he's
also known as a podcaster the pan
cast philosophy podcast which is one of
the UK's most popular higher education
programs he's also the editor of the
talking about philosophy book series so
he's written written and edited a couple
of books on the philosophy of
Consciousness and then uh books that
describe the concept of God and also the
morality of the god that's being uh what
will you say portrayed um that doesn't
mean that Dr Sims is a religious
Believer by the way and and uh the
discussion that we had that you'll
watch what would you say what did we
delve into conceptualizations of
Consciousness also we
discussed what do we have in the popular
culture now with regards to the
arguments between the atheists and the
Believers let's say well we have an
argument about perhaps whether or not
God exists there's an argument
underneath that which is well what
exactly do you mean who is this God that
you're discussing how is he
characterized and is that
characterization reasonable on the
theist or the atheist side that's what
we delved into you know before you can
have an argument about belief you have
to specify what it is that you're
actually talking about now one of the
things we alluded to let's say in the
conversation was the fact that the god
that's criticized by The Atheist types
the materialist reductionist atheist
types is somewhat of a straw man and a
parody God and that that's not helpful
because if we want to get to the bottom
of things we have to make sure that
we're actually arguing
about the right thing let's say rather
than to reduce it to a kind of
foolishness that's that can be easily
dispensed with well that would be fine
if you could make that reduction
properly but it's not fine at all if you
have to reduce it without knowing what
you're talking about and that actually
happens to be the case for much of the
argumentation that's put forth by the
atheists is is the God they're
dispensing with is not the god that's
portrayed in the relevant work so
anyways we walked through that kind of
differentiation and
so what's happening in the world right
now in the West in particular there's a
crisis of belief what we believe
fundamentally is up for grabs well
there's an ongoing intellectual
conversation about how to respecify that
and this conversation was part of that
so to the degree that you're interested
in participating in and understanding it
then well this is the conversation for
you well so you have three books one on
Consciousness two on God one Associated
more with existence itself and the other
I think it's the newest one defeating
the evil God challenge um maybe we'll
maybe we'll start with
Consciousness so tell me a bit and
everybody who's watching and listening
how you approach the problem and and how
you conceptualize it let's let's talk
about that I've done a fair bit of
reading on the topic of Consciousness um
so I'm very curious to to hear your take
on
it well what I thought was interesting
Jordan is this interview you did with
Elon Musk recently and he actually
expressed a view that's pretty close to
mine he explained how in the beginning
13.8 billion years ago there was just
hydrogen and all of these physical
processes
evolve over time and somewhere in that
picture Consciousness must come into it
and he raised this question he said well
is it everywhere or is it nowhere
Consciousness is that feeling you get
that when you see your parents at the
school gate or that drop in your stomach
when you realize you've said you
something you shouldn't perhaps and
though that process of thinking 1 + 1
equals 2 those are all conscious
experiences and they make the fabric of
our worlds and just to understands the
like the value of that try and imagine
your life without Consciousness it would
be a meaningless Wasteland as the
philosopher Gregory Miller puts it so
there's nothing more valuable to us and
as George Orwell said it's difficult to
see what's on the end of your nose it's
a constant struggle so that thing that
the person watching this or you hearing
my voice now these are all conscious
experiences and they don't seem to be
captured in the language of ma matics
and geometry I.E the language of physics
Galileo put Consciousness outside of the
picture when it comes to physical
science in order for science to make all
the incredible advances that it has and
so our question is where does
Consciousness fit into this scientific
picture of the world that on the whole
people seem to be accepting in Western
societies my view is that you should put
Consciousness at the bottom that
Consciousness has to be there from the
beginning you need need some rudimentary
Consciousness for evolution by natural
selection to play with in the same way
you need some physical properties to
make eyes and ears you need conscious
Properties or particles to make the
kinds of interesting Consciousness that
you and me
enjoy so are you coming at this
primarily from a philosophical
perspective and to to what degree is
your Viewpoint informed for example by
biology and
Neuroscience I'd say my view is 100%
philosophical
but it goes on the basis of the things
that are missing in neuroscience and
biology neuroscience and biology are the
wrong sort of methods of understanding
Consciousness you can't scan someone's
brain and see where the you know the
color red is it's not you're not going
to it's not going to come up it's a
different kind of thing it's a private
experience that isn't available to third
person observation so anyone who thinks
that Neuroscience or biology is going to
tell us
where Consciousness comes from just
doesn't understand what science is
science can't tell us about the inner
nature of what particles are it tells us
what particles do these are known this
is known as the easy problem of
Consciousness right the easy problems
are the problems of trying to map out
what David Charmers calls the neural
correlates of Consciousness so I give
you a sharp punch to the chest right and
your your brain lights up in a certain
way and so I can go like that part of
your brain gives rise to these
experiences but it still doesn't tell me
where Consciousness itself comes from so
that's what's always going to be missing
from biology and
Neuroscience and the hard problem of
Consciousness as Chalmers formulates it
he gives it in two words explain
Consciousness so okay so let me let me
let me ask you a couple of questions
about that because I've thought for a
long time that the formulators of the
hard problem Consciousness are actually
wildly optimistic in a sense because I
don't really think they are tackling the
hard problem of Consciousness I think
the hard problem of Consciousness is
distinguishing Consciousness from being
itself I don't I don't and I I have a
hard time distinguishing Consciousness
from being and it's also quite difficult
in some ways to distinguish
Consciousness from from from
intelligence so let me let me delve into
that on the Consciousness side a little
bit to begin with so I've spent a lot of
time studying comparative mythology and
also binding that
analysis W with my knowledge of
Neuroscience and so I don't want to
generate interpretations of cosmogonic
narratives that are what run contradict
run in contradiction to what I know on
the neurobiological side and I like that
way of triangulating so to speak because
it seems to me the probability that
ancient mythology and modern
Neuroscience will come to the same
conclusions by chance is very low
because they're so disperate in terms of
their mechanisms of generating knowledge
so in the typical cosmogonic myth which
seems to involve Consciousness you have
three fundamental attributes of being
and becoming you have something that's
equivalent it's usually represented by a
paternal figure an a figure of order a
father
um a figure of light those are all
symbolic associations and it it
represents something like a an
extent structure of
interpretation and then there's
something to be interpreted which is
like a field of possibility that's
usually represented as chaos or it's
often represented as feminine it's
represented as the Knight
um it has a terrible aspect and a
positive aspect because out of potential
comes everything good and everything
terrible and then you have an active
mediary agent that's an intermediary and
in the Christian conception that's the
logos for example the logos is the the
active principle that mediates between
the forces of Order and Chaos and this
Con this conceptualization makes a lot
of sense to me phenomenologically and I
think it actually maps on quite well to
the neural science but the reason I'm
giving you this lengthy
Exposition as part of this question is
because it's relevant to this issue of
separating Consciousness from being so I
don't see how you can separate
Consciousness from being even even in
principle because I don't understand
what it would mean and you alluded to
this what it would mean for there to be
an a reality with without awareness now
that doesn't mean I understand anything
about what awareness is but but I don't
think it's distinguishable from the
problem of being itself m well I think
you're in very good company uh bertran
Russell thought this Darwin thought this
um Philip gof gayen straon mirel Bahari
there are a lot of people who share this
view that you can't separate
Consciousness from being and that being
as a whole whether that's Cosmos
existence God the Divine as a whole has
to have the property of Consciousness
and I I suppose that is slightly
separate from intelligence in the sense
that I can imagine some large language
model being intelligent or some let's
say on the physicalist worldview you
could imagine some insect being
intelligent in the way that it responds
to its environment without being
conscious that's conceivably I don't
think that's the case in the world as it
is but you can conceive of such a thing
so you can pull them apart conceptually
but what I think is interesting is this
seems to me to tie into well what I
understand to be your wi View and I
think perhaps it'll be good to to just
get that on the table so you can see the
comparisons there I find it a little bit
difficult to to follow some of the the
language you're using there so excuse me
if I oversimplify this for the sake of
trying to keep it clear in my mind it
seems to me that your view consists of
essentially three broad propositions
those propositions are something like
one when we perceive the world and act
in the world we're making value
judgments like the reason I see you now
is because
I you know I value this conversation
right rather than seeing some other
thing out of the infinite ways I could
see the room before me the second is
that you think these values exist on a
great chain of being on Jacob's Ladder
uh they emanate the form of the good or
they they lead to an anselmian
conception of the Divine or something
like this and third is that I believe
you think something like this and I'm
eager to hear any clarifications is that
you see story or fiction and scripture
as tapping into the Divine tapping into
truth or goodness whatever that thing is
that exists on top of Jacob's Ladder and
to link to our discussion on
Consciousness and being there that the
greatest being or the fullness of being
the thing that sits on top of the ladder
must be conscious and must be the
totality of being and again that seems
to run through the entire history of
Christian philosophy and maybe
philosophy more generally so I wonder
did you think that captures it am I
getting the the bits and pieces in the
right order there I'm taking four of my
esteemed colleagues and you across the
world oh wow this is amazing to
ReDiscover the ways our ancient
ancestors developed the ideas that
shaped modern society it was a monument
to Civic greatness to visit the places
where history was made that is ash from
the actual fires from the babyon burn
Jerusalem from
2500 years ago to walk the same roads We
are following the path of the
crucifixion and experience the same
[Music]
Wonder we are on the sight of a
miracle what kind of resources can human
beings bring to a mysterious but
knowable
Universe science art politics all that
makes life
[Music]
wonderful and something new about the
world is
revealed well I I think you've got the
the bits and pieces in the right order
with regard to conceptualizations of the
Divine I mean let let's take that a
little apart a little bit because that's
very much worth delving into so in
principle the postmodern s their ethos
is defined by so-called skepticism
towards meta narratives right so their
proposition this was leotard but it was
shared well it's one of the defining
characteristics of the postmodern school
I would say is that there's no
overarching meta narrative skepticism
toward meta narratives and that actually
I find that uh what would you say it's a
purile idea and the reason for that as
far as I can tell you can tell me what
you think about this technically is that
every perception and every action
requires a unifying
ideal so for example if I want to lift a
glass of water to my mouth I'm
sequencing I'm unifying a tremendous
number of unbelievably complex
operations in order to do that now it
seems simple in some ways to my
Consciousness because I'm operating
slightly above what I have automatized
neurologically and so I don't really
have any conscious idea of the
complexity of the molecules and the
atoms and the cells and the muscles even
that I'm using to move but I'm unifying
all those with regards to a value
oriented purpose and that would be to
quench my thirst and then that would be
nested in a higher order structure
values because I'm quenching my thirst I
presume because I believe it's better
not to be thirsty not to be in pain I
believe it's better to be alive than to
be dead Etc like so well so so even even
that micro
that unifying that micro Unity of a
given action unifies all sorts of things
that are subordinate to it but it also
partakes in a higher unity and what the
postmodernists seem to be claiming is
that you can just draw some arbitrary
upper limit to that unity and so then
let's go there for a second okay so
there's no overarching meta narrative
this would be I suppose in some way
skepticism about God there's no up
there's no upper Unity okay so what's
that the highest level then
disunity
like nothing well nothing is a stupid
answer because if it's nothing you can't
unify and if it's disunity then really
what you've done is you've developed a
metaphysics of of Discord and disunity
and you also have done it arbitrarily
it's like okay so you admit to the
existence of the uniting narrative that
allows you to drink from a glass but you
what you don't admit to the uniting
narrative that enables you to live in
harmony with your wife like where do you
draw the line exactly and and exactly is
the issue like you don't just get to say
well there are micro narratives and meta
narratives and we don't believe in meta
narratives it's like first of all
there's not a qualitative distinction so
like what exactly are you talking about
and second if there's no uniting meta
narrative then what the hell do you
think's at the top because it's either
Unity or Discord or nothing I suppose
and then you're in this nihilistic
catastrophe that seems to do nothing but
demoralize and and cause and wreak havoc
so okay so you you mentioned Jacob's lad
it's like well it seems to me that the
the
monotheistic insistence is that all
Goods unify towards something that
brings everything together which would
include it would include but even
transcend Consciousness right because
God would be Beyond Consciousness Beyond
unconsciousness but certainly one
definition of God is what stands at the
highest level of Unity now well so let's
we can Bandy that about a bit well well
I wonder just to ask you then at the top
of Jacob's Ladder then you take God to
be there you take God to be the thing on
which all values hang on slash the thing
that grounds all of the values to be
clear are you happy to to say that to
say I believe in the existence of God as
the greatest conceivable being let's say
well I think it's it's it's in some ways
it's a matter of definition I guess I
would I it's a matter of definition so
so because before we can talk about
whether or not God exists we should have
some sense of exactly what it is that
we're talking about in the moment we're
talking about the highest conceivable
potential Unity but then I would also
say so it stands at the top but it also
stands in the top in a peculiar way and
this is definitely insisted upon in the
judeo-christian Canon because God is
inconceivable and ineffable and so even
if you do put him at the top as you
approach him he recedes and that
capacity to recede is infinite it's also
not within the scope of
conceptualization right I mean the the
classic atheists they they they do a
they perform a sort of slight of hand
and what their God is always the the
wise old man in the sky who's the
supersti who's the obstacle
superstitious obstacle to the progress
of science but that's not at all how God
is conceptualized in the biblical Corpus
I mean God is put at the top of Jacob's
Ladder but he's also ineffable and
receding well let's let's pick up on a
few of those ideas then um the first
thing I think that's worth pointing out
is obviously is as you've said there
there are conceptions of God in which
God is ineffable and there's a big
debate as you know there in philosophy
of religion to the extent to which God
is ineffable some people take God to be
completely ineffable you can't say
anything positive about God you can only
say what God's not in this view so God's
not a pineapple God's not an Adam
Sandler movie and thank God for that
think God's not this uh this delicious
beer to my side or anything like that so
I can say negative things about God but
I can't say anything positive because
God's beyond my own descriptions but I
think the majority of philosophers of
religion agree that you can say some
things about God dayart gives the
example of trying to get your arms
around a great mountain and the great
mountain is God but you can't understand
God in his entirety you can pick up a
few rocks you can describe a few rocks
and say hey this is the property of
omnipotence omniscience Omni benevolence
Consciousness and being immutable being
unchanging and the like and so I think
there are some things we can reasonably
say that God must have as part of God's
Essence on this question of oh let's um
okay let's let's
go there are some things that we can
just pause for a moment some things we
can say about God's Essence such as this
right okay the the just and just finally
on this see and because I know that you
know your your scripture very well I
don't know my scripture certainly as
well as you do I'm more from the camp of
perfect being theology as you know there
are three major strands of Theology and
philosophy which all try and arrive at a
different or the same definition of God
really Revelation theology looks at
religious experience and scripture and
tries to infer properties from God from
Revelation creation theology looks at
God's hand in the world and says well
God must be powerful enough to create
the world good enough to give us the
world and knowledgeable enough to give
us such a finely tuned universe and then
when we look at other versions like
perfect being Theology and this is the
version I think is the most reflective
of God is that God by definition must be
the greatest conceivable being if there
is a greater being than Gods then the
thing that you're talking about that
isn't the greatest thing isn't God God
must have all great making properties
that is power goodness knowledge and
anything else we take to be
intrinsically great at the top of
Jacob's Ladder if God has those things
then it is worthy of the name
God think your online activity is
private think again even in incognito
mode your internet service provider
mobile network and Wi-Fi network admins
can see every website you visit that's
right your school boss or even your
parents could be tracking your digital
footprint right now but there's a
solution expressvpn it reroutes all your
internet traffic through secure
encrypted servers making your browsing
history invisible rated number one by
top Tech reviewers like Cena and The
Verge expressvpn is incredibly
userfriendly just open the app and click
one button to protect yourself plus it
works on all your devices phones laptops
tablets you name it so you can stay
private wherever you go I use expressvpn
because it hides my IP address making it
nearly impossible for third parties to
track my online activity I finally feel
in control of my online privacy and as
someone who values their freedom online
this makes expressvpn a must have
protect your online privacy today by
visiting expressvpn.com Jordan that's
expressvpn.com Jordan and you can get an
extra 3 months free expressvpn.com
Jordan okay so so with regards to the
argument about
ineffability mer eliad points out one of
the consequences of a God that's too
ineffable so a God that you can't
characterize this and he he's mapped out
the the death of God phenomenon across
many cultures and over many times and
what you often see happening when a
culture emerges and begins to flourish
is that there's a revelation at its
beginning interestingly that has a
certain amount of psychological and
sociological energy and it unites people
it offers them a framework of meaning
that quells their anxiety and also a a
goal or a destination that imbus them
with positive emotion and that pulls a
culture together and then it happens
upon occasion that the Pinnacle value
that's posited by that culture comes
under rational assault or perhaps Falls
prey to conflict with other religions
and people start to doubt and the system
decays the death of god let's say well
eliat pointed out that a God that is so
ineffable that nothing can be said about
him tends to float off into what would
you say into the cosmic ether and leave
and lose his connection with humanity
and so I think it's better to think
about it as in a hierarchical manner and
so here's one way that I've come to
understand it it's both
neuropsychological and mythological at
the same time so you know in the story
of Exodus Moses is compelled forward to
take a position of leadership as a
consequence of his encounter with the
burning bush right the bush the bush is
a tree it's the tree of life and it's on
fire because it's alive and a burning
bush is a representation of that which
calls you forward that's a good way of
thinking about it now that takes
concrete form in your life right so you
might be attracted to a particular lover
you might be attracted to a particular
um uh profession or or a particular book
on a shelf when you walk into a library
like you get it's like a light turns on
and you're you're called forward to it
like a moth and then as you know as you
mature and you transform and the way
that you look at the world changes the
thing that compels your interest
transforms but then you could imagine
something at the bottom of that that's
constant across all those
Transformations that's like the spirit
of calling per se and it spirals you
upwards in a developmental path and it
recedes as you move towards it now that
that's one characterization of God
particularly in the Old Testament is God
is calling right and that's reasonably
well mappable I would say onto the
neurological systems that mediate
positive emotion because the positive
emotion systems do call you forward they
fill you with hope they fill you with
enthusiasm which is a word derived from
the phrase for being possessed by God
but it you know it's you can kind of
understand that behind all the things
that call approximately is the spirit
that calls
transcendentally and you could think of
the essence of that Spirit as a as a
closer approximation of the Divine
that's not a full characterization of
the Divine because you in in the Old
Testament for example you also have God
as the voice of conscience which is
quite different that's more of a
restrictive Voice or impulse so to speak
this is good though because I think that
these things that are in scripture
whether scriptures revealing truths or
it's revealing moral truths and the like
whether it's revealing symbols I take
your view to be they're reflecting the
Divine there shophow would put it
schopenhauer's view of Aesthetics was
that when we're having an aesthetic
experience it Taps into the rhythm of
what he called the will so you're
tapping into the form of aesthetic
Beauty which I think your view is sort
of similar to there in terms of
scripture there's certainly parallels at
least but what I think's interesting
from a
philosophical point of view is and I
think for people more generally is
whether these events are Concrete in the
sense that they're historical events and
second whether or not you do take this
God to be a perfect being like the god
of Anselm the god of aquinus the god of
Augustine like the classical conception
of God because I think there are a lot
of Christians out there at the moment
that are holding you up and saying look
Christianity is back here's Jordan
Peterson saying he's a Christian and
here's him talking about scripture like
new atheism's dead and here we are with
the resurrection of
Christianity but I don't think you're
the type of Christian which they have
traditionally had in mind for sure my
colleague at Durham University Philip
gof is he's either coming out or maybe
I'm going to be coming out for him here
as a heretical Christian and he thinks
you don't have to believe in a perfect
God and you don't have to believe that
the Christ event was a real event in
order to be a Christian there is a
middleway between God and Atheism and
that's my view as an agnostic as well
there is a middle way it's just
different to perhaps yours and Philip GS
and I wonder like would you be happy to
be characterized in that middle ground
in finding new radical solutions to
what's been a very partisan debate
between theists and atheists well I I
think I I don't think that
characterization is quite accurate
although I think not not in its details
but I think perhaps there's elements of
the gist that are accurate I mean
I'm I'm I suppose would you say you
could say philosophically that I'm an
existential Christian maybe that's a
reasonable way of putting it in that I
think that what I believe that the
judeo-christian ethos is not an ethos
of of what would you say a a
propositional
belief the propositional belief is a
surface and it's necessary but only in
so far as it's in accordance with
something deeper just like your word
should be in accordance with your
actions but your actions are the
fundament now the words shouldn't
contradict that and I'm not saying that
words are trivial because they're not
but but the commitment to Faith that's
demanded by Christianity is an
existential commitment and what that
means it's an all it's an all-in
commitment and that's a definition I
mean Christianity is actually an outline
of an all-in commitment it's a it's a
representation of that and so and so now
with regards to God being perfect well
in some sense for me that's a moot point
in a way partly
because with this Jacob's Latter
conception it's enough for me to know
that no matter how high I continue to
climb there won't be an upper limit and
I mean you know hell is being
characterized as a bottomless pit and
part of the reason for that
existentially is because things no
matter how bad things get and they can
get very very bad you can make them
worse there's something you can do to
make them worse but I also think that
that's true on the positive side which
is that if you follow your calling let's
say and abide by your conscience there's
no limit to the upward Trek
and and I guess I would say that we've
conceptualized belief improperly in our
culture and because of that we're caught
on a dilemma between the Enlightenment
rationalists and the Christians because
we have a
propositional dispute but I would say
let's talk about calling for a minute so
well can I just come on these are these
are three fascinating points I think
we're into the detail and and where
things are perhaps different between
your views and the let's call them the
analytic philosophers of religion the
people who are you know in the in the
universities thinking about this
question in you know in detail I think
there are three things there right um
the first is that you said uh that you
can climb Jacob's Ladder but you'll go
on forever like you'll never reach and
there there are two ways of interpreting
I think that statement the one is that
you Jordan Peterson and me Jack Sims can
climb the ladder towards intrinsic Goods
but perhaps we'll never reach what we
might consider Perfection I.E reaching
the Fulfillment of goodness knowledge
power we'll always be striving but I
don't think you can make a second claim
which would be that the ladder itself
goes on forever because ultimately I
think you need something to ground or
hang up those values onto you need an
trinsic good at the end a fulfillment of
what is taken to be good so I think
those two things one that's
understandable uh completely agree need
one understandable but in terms of your
like the idea of God as Perfection again
this is this is just a side point of
information what's interesting is that
Eugene nagasa and Katherine Rogers two
brilliant philosophers of religion have
claimed there has never been a
philosopher of religion who has argued
for anything less than a perfectly good
God and that's phenomenal that's
changing as I mentioned a second ago
maybe uh goth fixs into this view with a
god of limited powers or the god which
to go back to our earlier part of the
discussion a god whose Consciousness
underlies our world but is constrained
by the laws of physics let's say there
is a greater being than that and it's a
being that's not confined to the laws of
physics so we're we're in a really
interesting part of philosophy and
religion at the moment in our culture
where that's changing but the third
point and I think
this distinction shows the difference
perhaps between your thinking and my
thinking on this is that let's take that
statement I believe in God for me that
can be taken in two ways the focus being
on Bel either I believe in God like I
believe in humanity when I say that I
don't mean like there's a thing called
Humanity I mean there's a thing which
I'm putting my hope in there's something
that I trust I.E Humanity but obviously
there's a second way of taking that
statement which is I believe that this
thing exists like the concept of
humanity or God and so when you say
you're an
existentialist believer in God I think
you probably fall into that first
category that you take the leap of faith
towards God you trust God you put your
belief in God in that way rather making
the propositional claim there is some
concrete entity that is satisfied and is
true and described in the proposition
there is a perfect being who's conscious
powerful good and the like do you think
that's a fair characterization of well I
have a hard time understanding exactly
how to get to the second without
thoroughly dispensing with the first or
thoroughly arranging the first properly
so let let me respond to that in a way
that also addresses another issue that
you brought up if so you said with
regards to Jacob's lad and I described
this like infinite uh upward climb let's
say at least of human beings you said
well there has to be something at the
top so let me describe for a moment how
I think that's dealt with at least in
part in the combined Old Testament and
New Testament cannons and I'll make
reference I think primarily to the
concept of the logos so there's an
insistence in Christianity that and
Christ himself makes this claim that
he's the embodiment of the prophet and
the laws and this is very interest very
interesting claim technically because
what you have in the Old Testament and
you already alluded to this is a series
of characterizations of God like that's
L it's not all the Old Testament is but
The Narrative part of it is a sequence
of characterizations of God it's sort of
like there's a human being in this
situation and this is what God Appears
like to him or her and then there's a
human being in this situation and this
is how God Appears to him or her and so
the god of the Tower of Babel is
characterized in a different manner than
the god in the story of the flood
there's an underlying insistence that
these are all manifestations of the same
Transcendent reality but the
characterizations differ now there's a
pattern across those
characterizations now Christ's claim is
that he's the physical embodiment of
that pattern and it's an extremely
interesting claim I I have a very
difficult time dispensing with it let's
say on rational grounds and this is an
answer to the definition of what's at
the Pinnacle at least in so far as that
might be comprehensible by human beings
because Christ like job is the Mortal
man who says yes to existence in the
most radical possible Manner and so you
you to understand that you you have to
take apart in some sense what that
radical acceptance would mean if it was
truly radical and what it would mean is
something like what was initially
outlined in the story of job so job is a
good man by God's Own test testimony and
God essentially turns them over to the
powers of evil to so that they can have
their way with him and there's
historical precedent for that idea
because Cain invites in Lucifer to have
his way with him this is something that
happens in the Old Testament Cannon but
in the case of job job doesn't invite
Satan and God basically scks Satan on
him and then everything that can
possibly happen that's terrible to a
person happens to job not everything not
everything but it's a close
approximation and job's response job has
two responses like he's so tortured that
his wife says to him there's nothing
left for you to do except shake your
fist at the sky Curse God and die and
she has reason viewing his misery to
make that claim and part of the claim
and this would be relevant to the
discussion we will have about Notions of
the evil God it's like job is pushed
past what you might regard as reasonable
moral limits but he does two things that
are extremely interesting he refuses
under great duress to lose faith in the
essential nature of his being so he says
to his friends and to God he says look
um I'm not a perfect man I have the
imperfect I have the imperfections of a
good
man but but that doesn't mean that I'm
deserving of the ex existential
catastrophe that has visited me it isn't
a mere cause and effect consequence
there's an arbitrariness about it but
and so I don't lose faith in myself as a
being no matter what happens to me but I
also simultaneously don't lose faith in
the Divine itself even though all the
evidence in front of me at the moment
suggests that life is nasty brutish and
short and perhaps even unforgivable and
it's evil now what happens in the
Christian story in the passion is that
that story of job is
magnified across virtually all
conceivable Dimensions so that Christ is
the archetypal figure who faces the
worst life has to offer by
definition but
also throws himself fully open to that
and so you might say well to that's what
it means to take the that he takes the
sins of the world unto himself so
imagine that the proper pattern of being
for human being is radic
open armed acceptance of Fate not just
acceptance but
welcoming but then imagine because the
insistence there it's very interesting
idea is that the more radical you are in
that
willingness the more what the Old
Testament thinkers characterized as the
spirit of God is likely to dwell within
you and walk with you through your
trials and I can tell you as a
clinician I can't see a a flaw in that
argument because one of the things we've
learned in the clinical realm is that if
you encourage people to face the
terrible things that
they're tempted to avoid that their
character develops radically and they
become much stronger and that that's
been discovered across all the fields of
clinical Endeavor I think this might be
the the point where we find some some
interesting disagreement I think we've
been get along getting along like
brothers so far but those Brothers might
turn out to be Cain and Abel when I give
some a couple of clarifications here is
that it seems like your argument there
is like there is one of putting faith in
the Divine in believing in in the sense
I gave a moment ago to trust and place
your hope into something to in in God in
this example despite evidence to the
contrary you might think or despite
punishment from a God who claims they
are perfectly good and that seems like
an existential claim and I believe it is
an existential claim
but you put them the other way around a
moment ago you said I can't imagine the
first idea of Bel I gave you without I
can't imagine the second idea of belief
I gave you without the first I.E you
thought that without believing in
putting in the trust of the Hope in
something then you couldn't have the
latter but I think it's the other way
around I think you need to know that
this thing exists before you put your
belief or hope in it and so you could
think of an example right like I believe
believe in Santa Claus I.E I believe
that Santa Claus will punish naughty
children and and be good to The Good
Children the children on his nice list
and you might think that's a reasonable
uh thing to say I believe in but it's
not there is such a thing called Santa
Claus that exists so it seems like you
do need the latter there now I have a
couple this yeah well that might be it
might be related there is a
there is certainly a dance if you take
them both to be true but I don't think
you want to commit to the second one so
I don't think you can dance the dance
that you want to I think there's one
person tangoing in that scenario there's
only I believe in God and make the jump
there's no and the proposition that God
exists is true you don't say that one so
I don't think you're welcome on the
welcome on God's Dance Floor let's say
but let's well I have a I have a hard
time with what people who ask that
question people ask that question as if
the statement exist is self-evident it's
weird a like because when you're when
you're putting together a statement and
one of
the objects of the statement or the
subjects of the statement is the
ineffable Unity of all things you just
can't cram another word in there like
exists without introducing an equal
mystery because you're trying to make an
equation right does God have the
properties of some something that exists
it's like well you already have an
implicit notion of what existence
constitutes it's part and parcel of the
structure that's enabling you to ask
that question and I don't know what your
theology of existence means so when you
say to me I don't mean you specifically
but I could mean you too it's like does
God exist it's like well what's your
conception of exist I mean that's what
we're bandying about to some degree
right it's the thing that's at the top
of Jacob's Ladder okay well that's not
the same thing as a table right it's a
different kind of existence there is
something which is in the world physical
or non-physical that fits that
description you might have a a Vicken
sinian idea from the tractatus although
it's outdated that my language literally
maps onto something that exists in
reality it doesn't need to be a physical
entity I can speak of conceptual
entities like sets and numbers and the
like I can speak of things that I can
conceive of existing non-physically like
souls and angels and God so there are
discussions to be had there in an
interesting one perhaps in terms of what
we mean by exist why do we say that
Harry Potter doeses not exist but that
God does exist if we don't know what the
world word exists means like there is
something though call it exist or call
it I don't know the gist like give it
whatever label you want there is
something that separates Harry Potter
from God in the view of the Christian
they're not the same sorts of things and
I think that's important now we can have
a discussion about what that thing is
but I don't think we need to examine
every tree to make our way out of the
forest we know generally what we mean by
exist I've said that God is the perfect
being and we we both have a a broad idea
of what that might be and to believe
we've pulled apart together two types of
belief to believe in and to believe that
proposition
true so on believing in God trust and
faith job's leap of faith and and yours
as well perhaps is that it doesn't seem
like that's consistent with an authentic
existence in which one accepts the truth
I believe that one of your rules in your
successful book is tell the truth and at
least don't lie and perhaps that starts
with getting your own house in order
first that when you look in the mirror
you should tell yourself what's true and
not believe in things that you don't
know are true because if you don't know
they're true then you should suspend
judgment on those things and that's
strongly my view I'm an I'm an agnostic
about being agnostic and I'm almost sure
of it because I think there are very
strong Arguments for traditional theism
I think there are very strong Arguments
for atheism as well but ultimately
because I don't have enough evidence for
one side of the other I think the
authentic and perhaps cold dark and I
suppose uh empty Universe I find myself
in is one where I'm striving to find
that meaning find responsibility and
find Value and that's a difficult task
psychologically and certainly with the
Christian view you developed a moment
ago you get certainty right you get the
ultimate Cosmic purpose you get strong
objective moral values you get this
story of the world in which you sit
neatly in the place now just to talk
about this for a moment because I think
this is a really interesting point is
that those who are agnostic or like
myself or who are atheists they often
say things like oh I feel so small in
comparison to the rest of the cosmos
like my life seems so insignificant and
meaningless and you sort of go well if
you were as big as the world or as big
as the sun or as big as the universe
would that make your life more
meaningful and sort of going no it
wouldn't change it so size doesn't seem
to matter and then you think well maybe
it's because I only live for 80 years if
I'm lucky and compared to the 4 and A2
billion years of our world and the 13.8
of the universe it seems like my life's
meaningless in that context and you go
again like imagine you lived for 800,000
years or 8 million years does that give
your life more meaning it seems like it
doesn't now despite what my
ex-girlfriend might tell you it seems
that size and how long you last isn't
what's valuable in the context of
meaning and purpose the thing that's
meaning full and the thing that we cry
out for as agnostics or atheists is what
Alber Kimu referred to as you know as
the Absurd we call out for meaning from
a universe that's indifferent to us as
the philosopher Michael housecolor tells
us this version of the Absurd threatens
to Rob us of our sanity here be lions
and Dragons here be cold and dark and
empty and that's uncomfortable right
that you don't belong here or it doesn't
obvious that you belong here but I think
that's if we're going to tell ourself
the truth that's search for meaning in a
world that doesn't obviously present us
meaning is the world that we need to
embrace if we're going to live honestly
and
authentically what does the future hold
for business ask nine experts and you'll
get 10 answers bull market or bare
Market rates rising or falling inflation
spiraling up or cooling down if only
someone could invent a crystal ball well
here's some good news over 38,000
businesses have found the next best
thing they've future proofed their
operations with netsuite by Oracle the
number one Cloud enterprise resource
planning solution imagine this
accounting financial management
inventory and HR all seamlessly
integrated into one fluid platform it's
not magic it's netsuite one unified
system means one source of Truth giving
you the clarity and control to make
Swift informed decisions with netsuite
you're not just running your business
you're seeing it into its future
realtime insights and forecasting put
you ahead of the curve and and when
you're closing books in days instead of
weeks you're spending less time in the
rear view and more time on the road
ahead ready to turn uncertainty into
opportunity your business crystal ball
awaits netw Suite by Oracle because in
business fortune favors the prepared
speaking of opportunity download the
cfo's guide to Ai and machine learning
at netsuite.com jbp the guide is free to
you at nets.com
sjbp that's nets.com jbp
well I can tell you what made itself
manifest as evidence for
me
so the first thing I'll I'll sort of put
a PR droma on this account and so you
know that in the Christian
passion Christ faces youthful unjust
death at the hands of his own people
under the thumb of a tyrant let's say
and that's not the sum of the Injustice
of his death but in some ways that's the
essence and that's that's a pretty rough
account of mortal limitation but that's
not the whole story because the other
encounter that is part and parcel of the
Christian passion is the harrowing of
hell and that's a more mythologized
account let's say but it has equal
existential significance because the
essence of the Christian passion is
the it's the Transcendent story of the
Eternal serpent that's a good way of
thinking about it is that what Christ is
encountering is not only the limitations
of mortality but the actuality of
evil okay so
now and then you might say as well and
you could say this from a clinical
perspective that it's not possible to
live in the world and be complete and
grounded and upward striving in the best
possible manner without contending with
the issue of evil you have to contend
with your mortality but that's not
enough and it might be that contending
with the problem of evil is a deeper
problem than contending with the problem
of mortality that's saying a lot because
the former is no joke okay so when I
started my investigations 40 years ago
or more I was obsessed particularly with
the problem of evil and mostly from a
psychological perspective and the
question for me in a in a nutshell I
suppose was what's like to be an owitz
campg guard who enjoys his work and like
that's not a question that people
usually ask because they don't conceive
of themselves as the sorts of beings who
could do that much less enjoy it and
that always struck me as dangerously
naive anyways the consequence of
investigating that question was that I
became for whatever it's worth
unshakably convinced that evil was a
reality and maybe in some ways like an
undeniable fundamental reality something
akin to the reality of pain now what
that did for me was highlight out
something that was the reverse of that
by
implication because if you can imagine
hell and its darkest reaches you can
posit the existence of something that's
antithetical to that now it's always
been more difficult for me to
conceptualize what might be the essence
of good than it is to conceptual ize the
essence of evil I actually think it's
easier in some ways to put your finger
on evil but once you do that once you do
that there's an implication that
immediately emerges which is well
there's some Pathway to Hell obviously
since we can create it on Earth and have
done that repeatedly in our own private
lives say and and sociologically and
politically that strongly implies that
there's a pathway in the other direction
towards something that's the opposite
and been much more difficult to flesh
out but for me like that was the
existential grounding of my belief in
something approximating a Transcendent
good at least the Transcendent good is
the pathway away from let's say the
worst excesses of owitz this is good
because I I'm with you on this and I
think again the majority of philosophers
think that there is something called
evil but maybe they use different ways
of describing it it's interesting you
described evil as pain there but at the
same time we can cash out pain in terms
of higher order goods that that pain
gives rise to so you know I take the
injection so I'm immune from x y and Zed
and you know the pain was worth it it
wasn't a gratuitous or a necessary bit
of pain and so it's not it's not evil in
that sense and likewise when it comes to
aitz hoshima Nagasaki the pain and the
suffering of the individuals who died at
the hands of of these weapons or of
these regimes were themselves
the victims of what they might conceive
to be as evil or as gratuitous suffering
but the Christian says something well
they've said it for a long time right
that there are theodes and defenses that
one can give on behalf of God to get God
off the hook there that it's greater to
have free will and do these things than
not and people like Richard swinburn the
the popular philosopher of religion
defending Christianity he defends things
like the Holocaust and defends the
dropping of the bombs of Nagasaki and
hoshima and that's a real bitter pill
for a lot of atheists and agnostics to
swallow I do think that these defenses
and theodes collectively can respond to
the argument from Evil the evidential
version that is but there is a new
version there are several new versions
of the problem of evil that coming out
recently and I think the most dangerous
of all of them is what Eugen nagasawa a
Christian himself describes as the
systemic problem of evil and he says a
perfect good God the challenge goes
would not gear the system rig the rules
to give rise to life as evolution by
natural selection that's not a system
that God would put in place it
necessitates the pain and suffering of
countless sentient creatures and there
is no way of getting Consciousness and
intelligent life without them ultimately
he says that actually that problem's a
big problem for atheists as well because
he thinks atheists Like Richard Dawkins
are what he calls existential optimists
they think the world is on the whole a
good place and they're happy and pleased
to be alive yet the same person is happy
to run the problem of evil against
theists but maintain their own optimism
so he thinks that if you're an atheist
you can't be an optimist and you must be
a pessimist but if you're a theist and
you've got strong Arguments for theism
belief in God then you can appeal to
this broader metaphysics Kingdom of
Heaven God's ultimate plan and the like
and so the theist he thinks has the
better
has the better hand against the atheist
but ultimately I think that argument
works against him and eugen's a
philosophical hero of mine so I don't
say it lightly but you know what they
say to borrow from Aristotle Plato is
dear to me but dear is still his truth I
think he actually shoots himself in the
foot because I don't think it's
reasonable to believe in a perfectly
good God and evolution by natural
selection at the same time and there is
questions to be asked there about and
this goes back to the start of our
convers ation and working as part of the
inner experience project at Durham
University we look at the conscious
experiences of all things we consider to
have capacities for subjective
experience and the question is can these
non-human animals experience pain and
suffering in any way shape or form that
we can and I think most of us think
that's the case you 90% of people in
it's the simplest biological explanation
otherwise you have to pause it that the
systems in animals that are akin to ours
and very very Akin operate in some
qualitatively different Manner and
that's not an a useful aams razor
hypothesis this animals obviously
experience pain they look from from my
perspective the the proper position with
regards to especially complex animal
existence is that you assume continuity
until you can demonstrate
discontinuity that's the simplest
explanation now you said a bunch of
things there that were interesting so
let me let me respond to a couple of
them um so in the story of job again job
has every reason to shake his fist at
God and die to claim in some sense what
the antinatalists claim to claim that
existence like mephistophiles in girus
FA claims that the
existential situation that characterizes
reality is so dismal in its Essence that
would be better if the whole thing was
just brought to a halt that
Consciousness itself even being is not
is a reprehensible exercise in light of
the suffering that's ultimately
generated now for Gira that was
mephistophiles speaking and that's very
interesting because of course
mephistophiles isn't one of the world's
most positive characters and so you
might say well and by the way
mephistophiles was a great hero to Karl
Marx and mephistophiles does make this
argument and that's the spirit he stands
for is the adversary of being itself
being is so rif with suffering that it's
inexcusable in its essence you know and
that's in some sense that's the impetus
to Suicide right and so and it's
understandable now one of the ways that
I've dealt with that let's say
psychologically and conceptually is to I
suppose it's a by their fruits you will
know them argument my sense is that if
you take the seeds that grow from that
or the fruit that grows from that those
seeds that those fruits are bitter and
evil that if you adopt the anti-natalist
perspective and look it's perfectly
obvious why it's justifiable because the
world is saturated in suffering and it
isn't obvious to me that there's a way
of balancing the evidence so to speak to
decide on which side of the scales you
would you would place your conclusion
partly because how the hell do you wait
the evidence yeah you know
dv's or go go ahead this this is great
this is an interesting point of
agreement and I'd like to have seen this
come out in your discussion with musk
because I think he pointed to a form of
agnosticism to begin with and then when
talking about anti-natalism he said
something along the lines of it's
obviously ridiculous to think that the
world is just suffering and to quote the
well to paraphrase the late great Dan
dennet he said that we should only begin
to criticize our opponents after we
express their ideas in such a way that
they go oh I wish I put it like that
that's great and I don't think the analy
says everything is suffering as you
pointed out there they say the world has
more suffering than it does happiness
that all happiness and pleasure is
bracketed in suffering and pain this is
the Buddhist idea the shopen haran idea
the views of David benitar and David
pierce the the negative utilitarians who
want to eliminate suffering and that
means and I asked David Pierce this
transhumanist I asked him once well if
you're a negative utilitarian and you
think the moral goal is to remove
suffering why don't you just blow up the
world why don't you just give us drugs
that make us feel nothing and he said
well I don't think I'm going to get
voted in if I say I'm going to blow up
the world but I certainly would like to
do it and you got to admire the H there
right he could maybe he should start uh
sing a few politicians lies to get
himself to his what he takes to be the
moral end but ultimately though I think
you're exactly right that the problem
with trying to quantify measure the
amount of Good and Evil that's in the
world is a hopeless project we can't
that's and you mentioned evil God a
moment ago there's this popular
Challenge and philosophy of religion
that says look at all the good and evil
in the world who's to say that God is
good rather than evil and that's the
essence of that challenge and it works
because it's really hard to quantify
these things especially when you're not
just counting pains pleasures
happinesses and the like but you're also
seeing what goods and bads they
ultimately lead to you can play that
game all day long but there's one thing
that the anti- anti-natalist has up
their sleeve and that's to say that
existence itself is intrinsically good
existence and being sit at the top of
Jacob's Ladder that given the choice and
take John rolls you mentioned Marx let's
use another Lefty looking political
figure in political Theory John roll
said imagine you're in behind this veil
of ignorance and you've got to create
the world and we can change this a bit
for the purposes our discussion now
you're given the choice whether to bring
in life and conscious beings and not you
don't know how much happiness pain
pleasure they're going to experience how
much suffering they're going to
experience when they're in the world and
he asks well we're asking on behalf of
rules would you bring things into being
still not knowing how much happiness and
suffering they'd experience I think we'd
all say yes still I think there is no
person that I know of anyway that
legitimately defends the intrinsic IC
disvalue of life even David benitar the
most prominent anti-natalist doesn't
think that life is intrinsically bad he
thinks that the suffering and pain in
the world overrides the intrinsic
goodness of the world and I think that
is ultimately something that goes in the
antianti natalists
favor when we think about wildly
successful businesses we often focus on
their great products cool branding and
Brilliant marketing but there's an
unsung hero in their success stories the
business behind the business business
that makes selling simple for millions
of entrepreneurs that business is
Shopify Shopify is home to the number
one checkout on the planet and here's
the not so secret secret with shop pay
they boost conversions up to 50% that
means fewer abandoned carts and more
completed sales our marketing team uses
Shopify every day to sell our
merchandise and we love how easy it is
to add more items ship products and
track conversions in today's market
growth-minded businesses need a Commerce
Solution that's just as flexible and
dynamic as they are whether your
customers are browsing your website
scrolling through social media or
wandering into your store Shopify
ensures you're ready to sell ready to
elevate your business upgrade your
business today and get the same checkout
daily wire uses sign up for your $1 per
month trial period at shopify.com jbp
all lowercase go to shopify.com jbp
today to upgrade your selling that's
shopify.com
jbp so okay
so the I guess my first response to that
question to you as well is that it isn't
obvious to me that the axis of happiness
and suffering is the right Axis of
evaluation we we seem to believe that
it's self-evident that it's let's say
something approximating pleasure versus
pain but it it that is not the
only what would you say that those
aren't the only interpretive Frameworks
that are accessible so I I'll give you
an example a Biblical example which I
think deals with this point extremely
well and so the first great hero of the
biblical text is
Abraham and you could think of Abraham
as the expression of Seth who's the
third son
of of Adam and Eve right so you have the
battle between Cain and Abel Abel dies
and Seth is his replacement if you were
searching for the spirit of Seth it
would be Abraham okay so here here's
what happens to Abraham it's very very
interesting so we're presented with
Abraham at at the start of his story but
he's an old man already and he is a man
who's lived a life that hasn't been
characterized by suffering so he has the
Socialist Paradise at hand in a sense
because Abraham is the child of wealthy
parents and there's not a lot of
biographical information in the text but
what we do know is that whatever Abraham
wanted he got and that that was
sufficiently like Buddha before Buddha
is struck down by knowledge of death and
mortality Abraham's in the same
situation it's sort of it's the
situation of childhood Paradise that's a
good way of thinking about of
unconscious childhood Paradise now God
comes to Abraham in a very specific form
and God comes to Abraham as the voice
that compels him to leave his security
and Voyage into the world and that's
precisely the instruction is that
Abraham is to leave his kin and the
security of his wealthy father's
dwelling and to go out into the terrible
world and it is a terrible world because
Abraham has a very cataclysmic Adventure
War tyranny famine like sexual conflict
deep sexual immortality the requirement
for profound sacrifice like Abraham has
a life and it's not it's not hi
honic okay so then you might say well if
the solution to Life's conundrums isn't
pleasure as opposed to pain because
that's what Abraham has to begin with
what exactly is on offer okay so God
makes Abraham a deal this is the
Covenant by the way he makes him a very
specific deal he says if you hearken to
the voice that compels you outward that
takes you from your zone of comfort you
think about that as the voice of
Adventure four things will happen to you
you'll become a blessing to yourself so
that's a good deal right so you're not
living in misery now your your life
isn't pleasure and the absence of pain
now it's characterized as something
approximating a blessing you'll do that
in a way that will make your name
validly renowned among your
fellows you will do that in a manner
that enables you to establish a dynasty
of
permanence and you'll do it in a way
that's a blessing to everyone else now
imagine for a second tell me what you
think about this because there's a real
technical claim here so you know
children have to move beyond the zone of
comfort provided to them by their
parents they have to move out into the
terrible world all right so and there's
an instinct that compels them forward
that encouraging
parents admire and
Foster go out now that parents know that
their children are going to be hurt by
the world but they want to make them
competent now what God offers in the
abrahamic story isn't pleasure and it's
certainly not the absence of pain it's
something like it's something like noble
romantic
adventure and that's way different
that's a way different vision and it's
it's an interesting Vision even if you
think about fiction and entertainment
because the entertainment forms that
people prefer aren't representations of
the absence of pain or of hedonic
gratification they're almost always
representations of romantic adventure
and so I'll just add one more thing to
that because it also addresses something
else you pointed out and this is the
idea that God wouldn't produce a world
where evil could reign in the manner
that it does but I would say I I'm not
so sure about that because it there's a
there's a serious insistence in the
biblical text for example that what
human beings have to do is vital and
real yeah right it's not some Sideshow
and what that implies is that if you do
things correctly there will be
spectacularly positive consequences
let's say and maybe unimaginably
spectacular consequences but if you do
things
wrong like there's no bottom to the
abyss now that's a that's a very
demanding world but I I don't know you
know like you think about your own kids
like you want to set a challenge in
front
them and if you wanted to challenge
someone to to be everything they could
be if they were everything they could be
then would the challenge have those
archetypal poles of hell and heaven I
mean that is how the world appears to be
constituted this is good I think
ultimately though all of those points
are sound within a theistic framework
which we we already need to have right
if God exists or if it's reasonable to
take the leap of faith and believe in
God then it's reasonable to think that
God has a plan for you and that your
life is Meaningful despite the pain and
the suffering you experience there is
value to dedri Bon hofer's life when he
or in consequence not not despite even
right not consequence good well could be
you know yeah so so all it seems like a
meaningful and fulfilling life is
probably more important than having
hedonistic measures for the abrahamic
believer I believe that's completely the
right way of thinking about it but it's
a very different thing for the agnostic
or the the secular philosopher who can't
appeal to Cosmic meaning you have the
benefit of of cashing out all of these
other things in in God's ultimate plan
and your ultimate Destiny but the
agnostic doesn't get that I mean you can
have things that are like that right you
can have like an Aristotelian view where
fulfilling your natural end is what's
good Martha nusb defends a version of
this in a book uh justice for animals
which I've just finished and she says
you know there are creatures all over
the world that want to reproduce and
play and and grow and all of these
things she says thwarting those ends
would be bad even if you snuck up and
gave them the bullet in the back of the
head and they didn't know you're about
to kill them and they didn't suffer it
would still be bad cuz the dog buried
his bone yesterday and can't get it
tomorrow and you're taking that thing
away away from that entity that can't be
understood within a framework of
hedonistic utilitarianism such as that
defended by Peter Singer the hedonistic
utilitarian wants to say that the things
that I am fulfilled in doing the purpose
that I reach has to create more
happiness and pleasure for entities as a
whole than it does pain and suffering it
has to cash out at that so I think
within this abrahamic view that you've
developed there and which seems to be
your view is that yeah meaning and
purpose is more important than
hedonistic pleasure and happiness but
for the the agnostic and the atheist I
think we've got a bit more of a
challenge on our hands we need to we
need to find a ground for that morality
okay well thing is I I actually think
that that's I think that that's not only
possible but inevitable in a sense you
know so what's the quote by Christ is I
am the truth I am the way and the truth
and the life I believe no one comes to
the father except through me that's a
technical description in a sense I think
well okay so you you could take that
apart and let let's do that for a moment
and so the way is a pathway forward it's
a road and so the best possible road
leads to the best possible destination
and part of what you perceive literally
what you perceive is a road like we see
Pathways we see Pathways we see tools we
see obstacles we see friends we see foes
but what we see is a pathway
okay now the question is what's the
pathway now we described it earlier in
terms of Jacob's lad and that's a
reasonable way of conceptualizing but
then you might say well how do you find
the golden pathway and this would be a
question for atheists and agnostics as
well and one answer to that is you tell
the
truth and then these other realizations
Revelations let's say come to you you
could say you tell the truth in
relationship to the upward aim that's
another that's another useful way of
conceptualizing it and so I don't think
that that realization is Out Of Reach
for the atheists or the agnostics unless
they
Proclaim
verbally procedurally no that's no no
that's not the right word verbally let's
say explicitly that this higher order
Transcendent reality that transcends
even being is off the table it's like
what happens if you do nothing but
pursue the truth well the biblical
promise is that the revelation of the
fundamental structure of reality comes
to you that's what happens to Moses by
the way because see Moses is willing to
go off the beaten path to pursue what
compels him forward that's the key to
the transformation of his life because
before he encounters the burning
bush he's just a Shepherd now that's not
nothing right he's an adult he's married
he's taken on responsibility but it's
his willingness to engage in the pursuit
of the Transcendent this is what happens
to Jacob too when because Jacob is a
pretty miserable character at the
beginning of his story he's a liar a m
boy a coward a cheat but he decides that
and this is when he has that great dream
he decides that he's going to leave that
behind and and and aim upward and make
the sacrifices that are necessary and so
I think that
pathway I think that's an inevitable
pathway for people too because the
problem the atheists have in a sense and
the agnostics is well if you don't have
a purpose if you didn't have a purpose
for what you were doing you wouldn't do
it and so then you might say well I have
Micro purposes well and and they have to
suffice because that's the best I can
manage but the problem with that is that
micr purposes are fragmented and they're
not very motivating so like it's not a
it's not a stable solution and that
brings us back to the problem that we
described at the beginning well I
remember you saying this to my friend
Sue Blackmore in a debate you have with
her once and you said like I don't even
think you're an atheist Sue because you
need this ladder of values let's say to
paraphrase you you need this chain of
motivations to do these things uh I I
raised this with a friend recently I was
discussing it and they said well I've
been getting up and getting dressed
every day since 1998 like and I don't
believe in the system of values and then
you sort of push them and you start to
realize that what they're doing is
they're not doing what we might call a
humean um track of moral motivation or
motivation for Action so a humi view
would say that we're acting in
accordance with our desires and reason
is the slave to our desires and that
might give you a few like micro
motivations in your environment like
like I feel like take the example of of
good I desire to be good so like I see
someone in the street and I give them to
them charitably or something but then
you've got nonhuman views which you are
motivated by reasons and I think that's
the best place for this view that that
you develop in terms of pushing towards
the Divine or the realization of the
intrinsic good that if you are motivated
by reasons you can't keep going on
forever with your reasons there needs to
be an end to that reason the truth with
the capital T so think there are
different Frameworks of them and both
might be true at the same well I think
both are trueth at the same time right
that we are Guided by reason and we're
Guided by our desires so maybe you don't
have too much of a a problem with that
one well that's that's well there I
would I would say to some degree that
you're you're alluding to the fact that
in the absence of a formal structure of
integrated belief in a fundamental Unity
let's say a monotheistic belief that
people are still motivated and then you
you may to the fact that those
motivations can take you might say they
take instinctual form and that's a
that's a reasonable way of construing it
I would say that many of the pagan gods
are representations of of the instincts
that drive motivation and perception
right and so you so but what I think
that means is that if you if you if you
look at someone who has a propositional
framework in hand that dispenses with
the Divine Unity there's an implicit God
hidden inside their motivational
structure that's not explicated I I
don't think that because of as we said
they don't need it I'm saying it's there
whether they need it or not it's it's
part and part no as in like it's it
might not be there even if they do or
don't need it like I think you can have
a view in which you're just acting on
the basis of your desires and there is
no further end like we've got
instrumental like reasons right I act in
such a way because it's instrumental to
this good and I think that can stop
pretty quickly if the thing in front of
you is just fulfilling your desire but
then if it's reasons you need something
at the end look I think I I've got no
dispute whatsoever with that I would I
would only point out this and you can
think about this neurodevelopmentally in
a way so the the motivational situation
that a 2-year-old finds him or herself
in is a sequence of
short-term perceptual frames that are
motivated by instinct
and and each of those frames when they
emerge seeks for its relatively
immediate and self-serving satisfaction
two-year-olds aren't really capable of
integrated social behavior and then and
they they can manage they Li they live
they're alive they can operate in the
world of it has to be in an aboundant
environment but the price that's paid
for that and this is the is what Christ
refers to when he talks about a house
that's divided against itself is that if
you're if you're motivated by a Welter
of chaotic short-term instrumental
drivve so to speak that's going to
produce the Buddhists know that that's
going to produce a a a complex of
suffering in consequence of that even
though there'll be times when the
gratification occurs but but I would
also say this is also so so that's an
incoherent motivational structure if you
iterate it across time and you think
about it socially it doesn't function
well by its own it causes pain but
there's another thing that's interesting
too which is that you can take these
fragmentary motivations let's say lust
and hunger for example desire for status
those would be good ones because they're
very
primordial they interactions do produce
a developmental impulse that is
something akin to movement towards a
monotheistic Unity that's what motivates
that's what motivates M maturity so for
example as a 2-year-old old turns into a
three-year-old the 2-year-old starts to
become able to integrate his
motivational desires and emotions with
those of a a friend a play partner and
so you see that those underlying
motivations they're not inhibited by so
Society they merge into something that's
integrated across time and people and
that is a movement towards something
like a monotheistic unity and so even
these people that are fractionated in
their motivation and pursuing a
fragmentary Hedonism under that in a way
there's still a unifying force that's
attempting to spiral them up Jacob's
Ladder in so far as they're social at
all or future oriented at all good okay
there's a there's a few interesting
points here that I want to pick up on
the first just to end on to piggy back
off the point you raised there is that I
think that's a a generally a sensible
View and I can see that that working out
in the broader scheme of things but I
think ultimately there's still a problem
there of like why won Jacob's Ladder or
something like this if we've got
multiple things that we value
intrinsically I don't see why that would
have to end in a monotheistic belief
rather than something like Plato's Realm
of the forms where you've got a form for
justice a form for let's call it order
let's say there's a a form of the good
as well there's a form of power like why
not say that you've got multiple of
these these several of these entities
rather than the god of classical theism
and I don't think this I think this is
again is an interesting point of
agreement here is that the agnostic I
think although they're agnostic about
the existence of God or several gods and
I take that what to be theism or atheism
theism to believe in one God or many and
Atheism to say there is no God and not
many agnosticism I Define as rejecting
that either of those views has the
answer or is highly reasonable
but you can be non- agnostic about a
bunch of other things right you can be
non- agnostic about how many corners a
triangle has or whether kicking dogs and
children is bad or whether Jonah Hill
should direct any more films like the
answers to those questions are pretty
clear still for the agnostic but that
means we can perhaps form ourselves a
patchwork blanket to keep us warm in the
cold indifference of the universe so I
can draw from Plato's forms and have
this view which you've worked out there
in terms of this chain of of reasons and
why I act in the world I see that to be
completely compatible with agnosticism
so my question to put to you is why your
view rather than agnosticism beyond the
leap of faith which seems to be
something which is that maps that Maps
perfectly on on to how we started the
conversation with regards to say
skepticism of uniting meta narratives
because you're making an argument that's
analogous to that the patchwor quilt
argument and I would say there there's
two reasons for that that are technical
one is that if you have a a plethora of
competing values the competition in
itself engenders
anxiety and that's well mapped
neurophysiologically and and you could
say in a sense that anxiety is actually
an index of disunity and so the price
you pay for the patchwork
is the consequence of the multitude of
values that you have competing they're
going to compete there'll be situations
where they go head-to-head it's very
stressful conflicts of Duty even like it
can be a good against an evil but it
could be two goods against one another
and then you have to mediate between
them or you're or you're trapped between
them in a place where you can't make a
decision very existentially demanding
and then I would also say that the same
applies on the positive emotion side is
that the more Union there is behind the
aim that unites the more positive value
there is in movement towards that aim
and so the price you pay for the
patchwork is that you're not as
formidable as you would be if that
Patchwork was arranged into a hierarchy
with something uniting all those values
across your own being across the social
world and across time and so and I I'm
not saying that that's not possible
people do live that way and you could
also say that perhaps the world is
constituted that way but the price for
that
is disunity a certain degree of
hopelessness and and a complexity now
that doesn't prove that things resolve
into a a union I'm I'm not saying that
at all I'm just pointing out what the
price is now what I would I would also
say to return to another theme that we
developed that one of the things that
the Christian passion does as a story
is provide that framework of
unity now then you might say well why
would you prefer it I would say you'd
prefer it now that's a tough
one I think the reason that well the
reason that you prefer it is because
it's deeper and then you might say well
who cares and the answer is well when
you're going to be in the most
existentially demanding situations in
your life right so where you're making
decisions of mortal import let's say or
decisions between good and evil like
decisions that really matter you're
going to need something deep on your
side or you're or you're going to face
the consequences of your disunity and
foolishness and so it isn't exactly a
hedonistic argument it's more like there
will be situations in your life that are
so challenging that you better have
what's highest walking with you because
otherwise you'll suffer immensely you'll
degenerate but you could also easily
become an a passive or an active agent
of evil and that's worse what okay this
is this is good so there there two
things there right there seems to be one
which there's going to be conflict in
the agnostics patchwork blanket let's
say and the the competing values of
these different systems they draw
together might end up competing I'm not
sure about that maybe we can come back
to that with a an example but I think
what's really interesting and what
reveals our different in the types of
philosophy that we're doing is that
you're saying that there is like a
pragmatic benefit let's say to believing
in a God in terms of like you're uh
you're flourishing right if you're a if
you're an everyone else yeah if you're
like a right let's say you're an
agnostic and you're an existentialist so
you don't think that the life has any
obvious meaning and and this is my view
again is that it might be the case yeah
that you experience existential dread
that and I feel this like most mornings
right every every morning I personally
wake up and you kind of check in with
yourself right as the sun comes in and I
sort of think like like am I happy and
pleased to be alive like or do I feel
that dread today and I sort of go like
some days it's good and some days I feel
like that that emptiness of the ultimate
purpose of things now I I wouldn't trade
that right and this is something which
well Simone dear gives this great bit
and Memoirs of a dutiful daughter where
she says I was in Paris one day and I
returned to my apartment and I just
started screaming and I tore up the
carpet and I was terrified that one day
my life would come to an end but the
thing I was more scared of was that this
feeling would arise again the fear that
I might die and like I get there right I
think a lot of people who don't believe
in God do experience that but we should
believe things because they're true and
not because they make us feel good like
it might be the case that theism
increases well-being that theism helps
people flourish that Society needs some
kind of religion to get along like maybe
those things are true maybe truth isn't
the thing we should be guided by but as
an agnostic I find myself guided more by
by truth than than feeling good about
things I suppose and I think perhaps you
would like the truth to correspond to
the religion as well but I think it's
missing that extra bit of Reason like
think about that word rational
proportionate are my reasons
proportionate to my belief and I think
you were saying earlier you need to take
that extra step without the reason like
job but I think by definition job's
faith is irrational right that he takes
the leap despite the lack of evidence
despite evidence the rational it's
prerational how would you say it's
preal it's it's you need a stance within
which your rationality makes itself
manifest The Stance itself is bounded
and the the mythological response to
your query including I would say the
aspect that brought in the issue of
existential dread is The Stance is this
it's not this it's not the stance of a
prey animal it's not the stance of
someone Paralyzed by anxiety and and you
said you you made reference to waking up
in the morning you know and and
balancing in a sense the happiness with
the pain see I actually think it's the
wrong
framework like and and so I don't think
the problem can be solved within that
framework at all it has to be solved
it's something like solution in the
within the framework of the the
ultimately what an infinitely painful
and rewarding adventure and so in some
sense the heathenistic and the painful
become irrelevant and I'm not saying
they're meaningless because that would
be foolish and it could easily be cruel
but it's not the right frame the right
frame is the frame that job takes which
is I could say I could say this to you
for example this would be derived from
the Morality In The Book of Job it is
morally incumbent upon you to manifest a
courageous faith and that's a pre-
rational decision but we already
admitted both you and I already admitted
that you can't weigh up the evidence
first of all you're not in possession of
the evidence which is also something
that God tells job and job admits it's
like I don't have the evidence at hand
okay so you're fragile and mortal and
prone to evil and you don't have the
evidence at hand okay so what stance do
you take well the the the stance that
job takes is I will be a faithful Scout
of the formidable Future No Matter What
hell comes my way and it's a very
interesting stance because job and he
does this very explicitly his claim is I
am not to lose faith in myself or the
ultimate Spirit of reality no matter
what happens to me and the Pervert the
interest thing about that and this isn't
the reason for it but it is a
consequence is that that is a stance
that does in fact maximize flourishing
but that that's not the justification
for it right and you pointed that out
correctly this isn't an argument from
Hedonism or or even I guess the the
argument that it's the pathway that is
least likely to lead to hell that's a
that's kind of a variant of the
hedonistic argument except reversed
right is that any alternative pathway
tends to degenerate into the most
abysmal suffering you can possibly
imagine and I do believe that that's
true in the final analysis now that's a
bit of a hedonistic argument but but
it's only one of the elements of the
argument good I I think this is
important because you you say that it
still relevant the suffering the
happiness the pleasure the pain the
Hedonism is still relevant even if we
have meaning and purpose but suppose God
decided that our purpose and meaning was
to ensure the proc process of evolution
continued with all of its Blood and
Glory and we we stuff animals into
factory farms and slaughter them and
torture them forever you'd go like okay
that's not the kind of meaning that I
was thinking about God right I didn't
think that's what constituted a
meaningful existence I thought my
meaning would correspond to my happiness
and pleasure like they can't be
completely I think that's right no they
can't but I don't think that's right I
think I think the abrahamic vision is
more is more exist potentially accurate
and also more desirable see Doki kind of
knew this he when he when he laid out
his objection to reductionist
rationalism in in uh Notes from
Underground one of the things he pointed
out about human beings this was his
fundamental critique of socialist
utopianism and it's kind of an abrahamic
critique he said look if you gave people
the opportunity to live a life devoid of
let's say anxiety and pain so that they
had nothing to do this is basically his
words but
eat cakes sit in bubbling pools of hot
water and busy themselves with the
continuity of the species that human
beings were constituted such that the
first thing they would do is take a
mallet to the Utopia and destroy it just
so that something interesting and
adventurous would happen smash the and I
really exactly because we're not the the
the hypothesis is and this is the
abrahamic hyp we're not built for
hedonistic infantilism that whatever the
world's about it's not about pain and
pleasure not that they're irrelevant
because that's that's not a reasonable
thing to propose but that that's not the
issue and that that higher Unity is
something like it's something like the
intermingling of Pleasure and Pain think
about it this way man when you think
about your life and you you wake up in
the morning and you're just trying to
justify your miserable existence to
yourself and your memory wanders down
the pathways of your life and you
remember some event that befell you
where you disciplined yourself and you
strove against remarkable odds and you
suffered along the way but you
accomplished the aim and you take refuge
in that memory and that isn't a memory
of the absence of pain quite quite the
contrary and it also might be that the
antithesis of pain is something like the
willingness to undergo it voluntarily
and it's certainly what's represented by
the crucifixion and so it's an Embrace
even of what's negative it's it's
certainly not a replacement of suffering
with with like hedonic gratification and
certainly not the eradication of
suffering now maybe you don't like that
world and you know but the there's a
problem there too this is the problem
job faces it's like
you that you cannot like the world but
that doesn't mean that you can what
would you say it isn't obvious that you
have the capability or the right to
stand in opposition to its moral order
so now you can debate that obviously but
this this seems to I mean we mentioned
again this concept of of an evil God
earlier on this is you find this in in
the literature like trying to run this
parody argument against the existence of
a good god quite a lot in that okay so
I'm going to I'm going to hang on one
sec that we have to do something here
because we're running out of time so
what I would recommend is this I wanted
to get to the to the new the meat of
your new book now we have another half
an hour on the daily wire let's delve
into the issue of the good versus evil
God that's come up in philosophical
discussion if that's okay because
that'll be a good that'll be a great
thing for us to do just for half an hour
you can walk us through that so
everybody for everybody who's watching
and listening that is what we'll do on
the daily wi side so if you want to join
us there uh please feel welcome to do
that and you can throw some support the
daily wire way too if you're inclined to
do that and they're good advocates for
while this kind of discussion which they
help bring to everyone you know grtis
which is
I think quite a remarkable uh offering
so in any case let's do that and so
we'll we'll close this off we did a fair
bit of wandering around theological and
conceptual territory we laid a nice
groundwork for the next part of this so
as I said everybody if you're watching
and listening join us on the daily wire
side thank you very much for the
discussion and for sharing it with
everyone who's watching and listening
and we'll continue in in a couple of
minutes and as I said everybody join us
[Music]